UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 1 
 
UNIT – I            
OPERATING SYSTEMS OVERVIEW: Introduction-operating system operations, process 
management,memory management, storage management, protection and security, System 
structures-Operating system services, systems calls, Types of system calls, system programs 
(T1: Ch-1, 2) (1.1-1.9, 2.1-2.5) 
 
What is an Operating System? 
A program that acts as an intermediary between a user of a computer and the computer 
hardware 
Operating system goals: 
• Execute user programs and make solving user problems easier 
• Make the computer system convenient to use 
• Use the computer hardware in an efficient manner 
Computer System Structure 
Computer system can be divided into four components 
• Hardware – provides basic computing resources 
CPU, memory, I/O devices 
• Operating system 
Controls and coordinates use of hardware among various applications and users 
• Application programs – define the ways in which the system resources are used to 
solve the computing problems of the users 
Word processors, compilers, web browsers, database systems, video games 
• Users 
People, machines, other computers 
Four Components of a Computer System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 2 
 
Operating System Definition 
• An operating system as a resource allocator. A computer system has many resources 
that may be required to solve a problem: CPU time, memory space, ﬁle -storage space, 
I/O devices, and so on. The operating system acts as the manager of these resources. 
• Decides between conflicting requests for efficient and fair resource use 
• OS is a control program A control program manages the execution of user programs 
to prevent errors and improper use of the computer. It is especially concerned  with 
the operation and control of I/O devices. 
• “OS is t he one program running at all times on the computer” is the kernel.  
Everything else is either a system program (ships with the operating system) or an 
application program 
• System programs which are associated with the operating system but are not part of 
the kernel, and application programs which include all programs not associated with 
the operation of the system.) 
 
Computer Startup 
• bootstrap program is loaded at power-up or reboot 
• Typically stored in ROM or EPROM, generally known as firmware 
• Initializes all aspects of system 
• Loads operating system kernel and starts execution 
• Once the kernel is loaded and executing, it can start providing services to the system 
and its users. Some services  are provided outside of the kernel, by system programs 
that are loaded into memory at boot time to become system processes,  or system 
daemons that run the entire time the kernel is running. On UNIX, the ﬁrst system 
process is “init,” and it starts many ot her daemons. Once this phase is complete, the 
system is fully booted, and the system waits for some event to occur. 
 
Computer System Organization 
• Computer-system operation 
• One or more CPUs, device controllers connect through common bus providing access 
to shared memory 
• Concurrent execution of CPUs and devices competing for memory cycles 
 
 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer-System Operation 
• I/O devices and the CPU can execute concurrently 
• Each device controller has a local buffer 
• CPU moves data from/to main memory to/from local buffers 
• Device controller informs CPU that it has finished its operation by causing An interrupt 
• The occurrence of an event is usually signaled by an Interrupt from either the 
hardware or the software. Hardware may trigger an interrupt at any time by sending a 
signal to the CPU, usually by way of the system bus. Software may trigger an interrupt 
executing a special operation called a System call (also called a monitor call) 
 
Common Functions of Interrupts 
• Interrupt transfers control to the interrupt service routine generally, through the 
interruptvector, which contains the addresses of all the service routines 
• Interrupt architecture must save the address of the interrupted instruction 
• Incoming interrupts are disabled while another interrupt is being processed to prevent 
a lost interrupt. A trap is a software-generated interrupt caused either by an error or a 
user request 
• An operating system is interrupt driven 
 
Interrupt Handling 
• The operating system preserves the state of the CPU by storing registers and the 
program counter 
• Determines which type of interrupt has occurred: 
• Separate segments of code determine what action should be taken for each type of 
interrupt 
 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 4 
 
Interrupt Timeline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I/O Structure 
• A general-purpose computer system consists of CPUs and multiple device controllers 
that are connected through a common bus. Each device controller is in charge of a 
speciﬁc type of device. Depending on the controller, more than one device may be 
attached. For instance, seven or more devices can be attached to the small computer -
systems interface (SCSI) controller.  
• A device controller maintains some local buffer storage and a set of special -purpose 
registers. The device controller is responsible for moving the data between the 
peripheral devices that it controls and its local buffer storage. Typically, operating 
systems have a device driver for each device controller. This device driver 
understands the device controller and provides the rest of the operating  system with a 
uniform interface to the device. 
• To start an I/O operation, the device driver loads the appropriate registers within the 
device controller. The device controller, in turn, ex amines the contents of these 
registers to determine what action to take (such as “read a character from the 
keyboard”). The controller starts the transfer of data from the device to its local buffer. 
Once the transfer of data is complete, the device contro ller informs the device driver 
via an interrupt that it has ﬁnished its operation. The device driver then returns 
control to the operating system, possibly returning the data or a pointer to the data if 
the operation was a read.  For other operations, the d evice driver returns status 
information. 
• System call – request to the operating system to allow user to wait for I/O completion 
• Device-status table contains entry for each I/O device indicating its type, address, 
and state 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 5 
 
• Operating system indexes into I/O device table to determine device status and to 
modify table entry to include interrupt 
 
Storage Structure 
The CPU can load instructions only from memory, so any programs to run must be stored 
there. General -purpose computers run most of their program s from rewriteable memory, 
called main memory (also called or RAM). Main commonly is implemented in a 
semiconductor technology called DRAM. 
 
All forms of memory provide an array of words. Each word has its own address. 
Interaction is achieved through a sequence of load or store instructions to specific memory 
addresses. The load instruction moves a word from main memory to an internal register 
within the CPU, whereas the store instruction moves the content of a register to main 
memory. 
 
Ideally, we want the programs and data to reside in main memory permanently. This 
arrangement usually is not possible for the following two reasons: 
1) Main memory is usually too small to store all needed programs and data permanently. 
2) Main memory is a volatile stor age device that loses its contents when power is turned 
off or otherwise lost. 
Thus, most computer systems provide secondary storage as an extension of main memory. 
The main requirement for secondary storage is that it be able to hold large quantities of d ata 
permanently. The most common secondary -storage device is a magnetic disk  which 
provides storage for both programs and data. 
 
• Main memory – only large storage media that the CPU can access directly 
• Secondary storage – extension of main memory that provides large nonvolatile storage 
capacity 
• Magnetic disks – rigid metal or glass platters covered with magnetic recording 
material  
 
Storage Hierarchy 
• Storage systems organized in hierarchy 
• Speed 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 6 
 
• Cost 
• Volatility 
Caching – copying information into faster storage system; main memory can be viewed as a 
last cache for secondary storage 
 
 
Computer-System Architecture 
• Most systems use a single general-purpose processor (PDAs through mainframes) 
• Most systems have special-purpose processors as well 
• Multiprocessors systems growing in use and importance 
• Also known as parallel systems, tightly-coupled systems 
Advantages include 
1.Increased throughput 
2.Economy of scale 
3.Increased reliability – graceful degradation or fault tolerance 
Two types 
1.Asymmetric Multiprocessing 
2.Symmetric Multiprocessing 
 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 7 
 
 
 
How a Modern Computer Works 
Symmetric Multiprocessing Architecture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multiprocessing adds CPUs to increase computing power. If the CPU has an integrated 
memory controller, then adding CPUs can also increase the amount of memory addressable in 
the system. Either way, multiprocessing can cause a system to change its memory access 
model from uniform memory access to non -uniform memory access UMA is defined as the 
situation in which access to any RAM fro m any CPU takes the same amount of time. With 
NUMA, some parts of memory may take longer to access than other parts, creating a 
performance penalty. Operating systems can minimize the NUMA penalty through resource 
management. 
 
 
 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 8 
 
A Dual-Core Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We show a dual -core design with two cores on the samechip. In this design, each core has its 
own register set as well as its own localcache; other designs might use a shared cache or a 
combination of local andshared caches. 
 
Blade servers are a recent development in which multiple processor boards, I/0 boards, and 
networking boards are placed in the same chassis. The difference between these and 
traditional multiprocessor systems is that each blade -processor board boots independently 
and runs its own operating system. 
 
Clustered Systems 
Another type of multiprocessor system is a clustered system, which gathers  together multiple 
CPUs. Clustered systems differ from the multiprocessor  systems (loosely coupled). Clustering 
is usually used to provide high-availability service — that is, service will continue even if one 
or more systems in the cluster fail. 
 
Clustering can be structured asymmetrically or symmetrically.  In asymmetric clustering , 
one machine is in hot-standby mode while the other is running the applications. The hot -
standby host machine does nothing but monitor the active server. If that server fails, the hot -
standby host becomes the active server. In symmetric  mode, two or more hosts are running 
applications and are monitoring eac h other. This mode is obviously more efficient, as it uses 
all of the available hardware. It does require that more than one application be available to 
run. 
 
However, applications must be written to take advantage of the cluster by using a technique 
known as parallelization which consists of dividing a program into separate components 
that run in parallel on individual computers in the cluster. 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 9 
 
Because most operating systems lack support for simultaneous data access by multiple 
hosts, parallel clusters are  usually accomplished by use of special versions of software and 
special releases of applications. For example, Oracle Real Application Cluster is a version of 
Oracle's database that has been designed to run on a parallel cluster. Each machine runs 
Oracle, and a layer of software tracks access to the shared disk. Each machine has full access 
to all data in the database. To provide this shared access to data, the system must also supply 
access control and locking to ensure that no conflicting operations occu r. This function, 
commonly known as a is distributed lock manager (DLM). 
 
 
Operating System Structure 
• Multiprogramming needed for efficiency 
• Single user cannot keep CPU and I/O devices busy at all times 
• Multiprogramming organizes jobs (code and data) so CPU always has one to Execute a 
subset of total jobs in system is kept in memory 
• Main memory is too small to accommodate all jobs, the jobs are kept initially on the 
disk in the Job pool . This pool consists of all processes residing on disk awaiting 
allocation of main memory. 
• The operating system picks and begins to execute one of the jobs in memory. 
• One job selected and run via job scheduling 
• When it has to wait (for I/O for example), OS switches to another job 
• Timesharing (multitasking) is logical extensi on in which CPU switches jobs so 
frequently that users can interact with each job while it is running, creating 
interactive computing 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 10 
 
Memory Layout for Multi programmed System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Time sharing (or multitasking) is a logical extension of multiprogramming. In time -sharing 
systems, the CPU executes multiple jobs by switching among them, but the switches occur so 
frequently that the users can interact with each program while it is running. 
 
Time sharing requires an interactive computer system , which provides direct 
communication between the user and the system. The user gives instructions to the operating 
system or to a program directly, using a input device such as a keyboard, mouse, touch pad, or 
touch screen, and waits for immediate results  on an output device. Accordingly, the response 
time should be short—typically less than one second. 
 
A time -shared operating system allows many users to share the computer 
simultaneously. Since each action or command in a time-shared system tends to be short, only 
a little CPU time is needed for each user.A program loaded into memory and executing is 
called a process. When a process executes, it typically executes for only a short time before it 
either finishes or needs to perform I/O. 
 
Time sharing and multiprogramming require that several jobs be kept  simultaneously 
in memory. If several jobs are ready to be brought into memory,and if there is not enough 
room for all of them, then the system must chooseamong them. Making this decision involves 
job scheduling. 
 
If several jobs are ready to run at the same time, the system must choose which job 
will run first. Making this decision is CPU scheduling. In a time-sharing system, the operating 
system must ensure reasonable response time. This goal is sometimes accomplished through 
swapping, whereby processes are swapped in and out of main memory to the disk. 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 11 
 
A more common method for ensuring reasonable response time is virtual memory, a 
technique that allows the execution of a process that is not completely in m emory. The main 
advantage of the virtual -memory scheme is that it enables users to run programs that are 
larger than actual physical memory 
 
Operating-System Operations 
Modern operating systems are interrupt driven. If there are no processes to execute, no I/O 
devices to service, and no users to whom to respond, an operating system will sit quietly, 
waiting for something to happen. Events are almost always signaled by the  occurrence of an 
interrupt or a trap. A trap (or an exception) is a software-generated interrupt caused either 
by an error (for example, division by zero or invalid memory access) or by a specific request 
from a user program that an operating -system servi ce be performed. For each type of 
interrupt, separate segments of code in the operating system determine what action should 
be taken. An interrupt service routine is provided to deal with the interrupt. 
 
Transition from User to Kernel Mode 
At the very least, we need two separate modes of operation: user mode and kernel mode (also 
called supervisor mode, system mode, or privileged mode). A bit, called the mode bit, is added 
to the hardware of the computer to indicate the current mode: kernel (0) or user (1). With the 
mode bit, we can distinguish between a task that is executed on behalf of the operating 
system and one that is executed on behalf of the user. When the computer system is executing 
on behalf of a user application, the system is in user mode. Howe ver, when a user application 
requests a service from the operating system (via a system call), the system must transition 
from user to kernel mode to fulfill the request. 
 
At system boot time, the hardware starts in kernel mode. The operating system is the n 
loaded and starts user applications in user mode. Whenever a trap or interrupt occurs, the 
hardware switches from user mode to kernel mode (that is, changes the state of the mode bit 
to 0). Thus, whenever the operating system gains control of the compute r, it is in kernel 
mode. The system always switches to user mode (by setting the mode bit to 1) before passing 
control to a user program. 
 
The hardware allows privileged instructions to be executed only in kernel mode. If an 
attempt is made to execute a privileged instruction in user mode, the hardware does not 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 12 
 
execute the instruction but rather treats it as illegal and traps it to the operat ing system. The 
instruction to switch to kernel mode is an example of a privileged instruction. Some other 
examples include I/O control, timer management, and interrupt management. 
 
System calls provide the means for a user program to ask the operating sys tem to 
perform tasks reserved for the operating system on the user program’s behalf. A system call 
is invoked in a variety of ways, depending on the functionality provided by the underlying 
processor. In all forms, it is the method used by a process to req uest action by the operating 
system. A system call usually takes the form of a trap to a specific location in the interrupt 
vector. This trap can be executed by a generic trap instruction, although some systems (such 
as MIPS) have a specific syscall instruction to invoke a system call. 
 
When a system call is executed, it is typically treated by the hardware as a software 
interrupt. Control passes through the interrupt vector to a service routine in the operating 
system, and the mode bit is set to kernel mod e. The system-call service routine is a part of the 
operating system. The kernel examines the interrupting instruction to determine what 
system call has occurred; a parameter indicates what type of service the user program is 
requesting. 
 
Timer  
We must ensure that the operating system maintains control over the CPU. We cannot allow a 
user program to get stuck in an infinite loop or to fail to call system services and never return 
control to the operating system. To accomplish this goal, we can use a timer . A timer can be 
set to interrupt the computer after a specified period. The period may be fixed (for example, 
1/60 second) or variable (for example, from 1 millisecond to 1 second). A variable timer is 
generally implemented by a fixed -rate clock and a cou nter. The operating system sets the 
counter. Every time the clock ticks, the counter is decremented. When the counter reaches 0, 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 13 
 
an interrupt occurs. For instance, a 10 -bit counter with a 1 -millisecond clock allows 
interrupts at intervals from 1 millisecon d to 1,024 milliseconds, in steps of 1 millisecond. We 
can use the timer to prevent a user program from running too long. 
 
Process Management 
A program does nothing unless its instructions are executed by a CPU. A program in 
execution, as mentioned, is a p rocess. A time -shared user program such as a compiler is a 
process. A word -processing program being run by an individual user on a PC is a process. A 
system task, such as sending output to a printer, can also be a process (or at least part of one). 
 
A proc ess needs certain resources —including CPU time, memory, files, and I/O 
devices—to accomplish its task. These resources are either given to the process when it is 
created or allocated to it while it is running. In addition to the various physical and logica l 
resources that a process obtains when it is created, various initialization data (input) may be 
passed along. 
 
A single-threaded process has one program counter specifying the next instruction to 
execute. The execution of such a process must be sequentia l. The CPU executes one 
instruction of the process after another, until the process completes. A multithreaded process 
has multiple program counters, each pointing to the next instruction to execute for a given 
thread. 
 
A process is the unit of work in a system. A system consists of a collection of processes, 
some of which are operating -system processes (those that execute system code) and the rest 
of which are user processes (those that execute user code). 
 
The operating system is responsible for the follo wing activities in connection with process 
management:  
Process Management Activities 
• Scheduling processes and threads on the CPUs  
• Creating and deleting both user and system processes  
• Suspending and resuming processes  
• Providing mechanisms for process synchronization  
• Providing mechanisms for process communication 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 14 
 
• A process is a program in execution. It is a unit of work within the system. Program is a 
passive entity, process is an active entity. 
• Process needs resources to accomplish its task 
• Process termination requires reclaim of any reusable resources 
• Single-threaded process has one program counter specifying location of next 
instruction to execute 
• Process executes instructions sequentially, one at a time, until completion 
• Multi-threaded process has one program counter per thread 
• Typically system has many processes, some user, some operating system running 
concurrently on one or more CPUs 
 
Memory Management 
The main memory is central to the operation of a modern computer system. Main memory is 
a large array of bytes, ranging in size from hundreds of thousands to billions. Each byte has its 
own address. Main memory is a repository of quickly accessible data shared by the CPU and 
I/O devices. The central processor reads instructions from main memory during the 
instruction-fetch cycle and both reads and writes data from main memory during the data -
fetch cycle.  
 
For a program to be executed, it must be mapped to absolute  addresses and loaded 
into memory. As the program executes, it accesses program instructions and data from 
memory by generating these absolute addresses. Eventually, the program terminates, its 
memory space is declared available, and the next program can be loaded and executed. 
 
To improve both the utilization of the CPU and the speed of the computer’s response to its 
users, general -purpose computers must keep several programs in memory, creating a need 
for memory management. 
 
Memory management activities 
• Keeping track of which parts of memory are currently being used and by whom 
• Deciding which processes (or parts thereof) and data to move into and out of memory 
• Allocating and deallocating memory space as needed 
 
 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 15 
 
Storage Management 
To make the computer system convenient for users, the operating system provides a uniform, 
logical view of information storage. The operating system abstracts from the physical 
properties of its storage devices to define a logical storage unit, the file. The operating system 
maps files onto physical media and accesses these files via the storage devices. 
 
File-System Management 
File management is one of the most visible components of an operating system. Computers 
can store information on several different types of physical media.  Magnetic disk, optical disk, 
and magnetic tape are the most common. Each of these media has its own characteristics and 
physical organization. Each medium is controlled by a device, such as a disk drive or tape 
drive, that also has its own unique characte ristics. These properties include access speed, 
capacity, data-transfer rate, and access method (sequential or random).  
 
A file is a collection of related information defined by its creator. Commonly, files 
represent programs (both source and object forms ) and data. Data files may be numeric, 
alphabetic, alphanumeric, or binary. 
 
OS File Management activities 
• Creating and deleting files and directories 
• Primitives to manipulate files and directories 
• Mapping files onto secondary storage 
• Backup files onto stable (non-volatile) storage media 
 
Mass-Storage Management 
The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connection with disk 
management:  
• Free-space management  
• Storage allocation  
• Disk scheduling 
 
Magnetic tape drives and their tapes and CD and DVD drives and platters are typical tertiary 
storage devices. 
 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 16 
 
Caching 
When we need a particular piece of information, we first check whether it is in the cache. If it 
is, we use the information directly from the cache. If it is not, we use the information from the 
source, putting a copy in the cache under the assumption that we will need it again soon. 
 
In addition, internal programmable registers, such as index registers, provide a high -
speed cache for main memory. The programmer (or compiler) implements the register -
allocation and register-replacement algorithms to decide which information to keep in 
registers and which to keep in main memory.  
 
Other caches are implemented totally in hardware. For instance, most systems have an 
instruction cache to hold the instructions expected to  be executed next. Without this cache, 
the CPU would have to wait several cycles while an instruction was fetched from main 
memory.Because caches have limited size, cache management is an important design 
problem. Careful selection of the cache size and of  a replacement policy can result in greatly 
increased performance. 
 
Main memory can be viewed as a fast cache for secondary storage, since data in 
secondary storage must be copied into main memory for use and data must be in main 
memory before being moved to secondary storage for safekeeping. The file -system data, 
which resides permanently on secondary storage, may appear on several levels in the storage 
hierarchy. At the highest level, the operating system may maintain a cache of file -system data 
in main memory. 
 
 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 17 
 
I/O Subsystem 
The I/O subsystem consists of several components:  
• A memory-management component that includes buffering, caching, and spooling 
 • A general device-driver interface  
• Drivers for specific hardware devices 
 
Protection and Security 
Protection, then, is any mechanism for controlling the access of processes or users to the 
resources defined by a computer system. 
 
Protection and security require the system to be able to distinguish among all its users. 
Most operating systems ma intain a list of user names and associated user identifiers (user 
IDs). In Windows parlance, this is a security ID (SID). These numerical IDs are unique, one per 
user. When a user logs in to the system, the authentication stage determines the appropriate 
user ID for the user. That user ID is associated with all of the user’s processes and threads. 
When an ID needs to be readable by a user, it is translated back to the user name via the user 
name list. 
 
In some circumstances, we wish to distinguish among set s of users rather than individual 
users. For example, the owner of a file on a UNIX system may be allowed to issue all 
operations on that file, whereas a selected set of users may be allowed only to read the file. To 
accomplish this, we need to define a gr oup name and the set of users belonging to that group. 
Group functionality can be implemented as a system -wide list of group names and group 
identifiers. A user can be in one or more groups, depending on operating -system design 
decisions. The user’s group IDs are also included in every associated process and thread. 
• Systems generally first distinguish among users, to determine who can do what 
• User identities (user IDs, security IDs) include name and associated number, one per 
user 
• User ID then associated wi th all files, processes of that user to determine access 
control 
• Group identifier ( group ID) allows set of users to be defined and controls managed, 
then also associated with each process, file 
• Privilege escalation allows user to change to effective ID with more rights 
 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 18 
 
Operating-System Services 
An operating system provides an environment for the execution of programs.  It provides 
certain services to programs and to the users of those programs.  The specific services 
provided, of course, differ from one operating system to another, but we can identify common 
classes. 
 
 
User interface. Almost all operating systems have a user interface (UI). This interface can 
take several forms. One is a command-line interface (CLI), which uses text commands and a 
method for entering them (say,  a keyboard for typing in commands in a specific format with 
specific options). Another is a batch interface, in which commands and directives  to control 
those commands are entered into files, and those files ar e executed. Most commonly, a 
graphical user interface (GUI) is used. Here,  the interface is a window system with a 
pointing device to direct I/O,  choose from menus, and make selections and a keyboard to 
enter text. 
• Program execution. The system must be abl e to load a program into  memory and to run 
that program. The program must be able to end its  execution, either normally or 
abnormally (indicating error). 
• I/O operations. A running program may require I/O, which may involve a  file or an I/O 
device. For specific devices, special functions may be desired (such as recording to a CD or 
DVD drive or blanking a display screen). For  efficiency and protection, users usually 
cannot control I/O devices directly.  Therefore, the operating system must provide a 
means to do I/O. 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 19 
 
• File-system manipulation. The file system is of particular interest. Obviously,  programs 
need to read and write files and directories. They also  need to create and delete them by 
name, search for a given file, and  list file information. Fi nally, some operating systems 
include permissions management to allow or deny access to files or directories based on 
file ownership. 
• Communications. There are many circumstances in which one process needs to exchange 
information with another process. Such  communication may occur between processes 
that are executing on the same computer or  between processes that are executing on 
different computer systems tied  together by a computer network. Communications may 
be implemented via shared memory, in which two or more processes read and write to  a 
shared section of memory, or message passing , in which packets of  information in 
predefined formats are moved between processes by the operating system. 
• Error detection . The operating system needs to be detecting and c orrecting errors 
constantly. Errors may occur in the CPU and memory hardware (such  as a memory error 
or a power failure), in I/O devices (such as a parity error  on disk, a connection failure on a 
network, or lack of paper in the printer),  and in the user p rogram (such as an arithmetic 
overflow, an attempt to access an illegal memory location, or a too -great use of CPU time). 
For each type of error, the operating system should take the appropriate action  to ensure 
correct and consistent computing. 
• Resource allocation. When there are multiple users or multiple jobs  running at the same 
time, resources must be allocated to each of them. The  operating system manages many 
different types of resources. Some (such  as CPU cycles, main memory, and file stora ge) 
may have special allocation  code, whereas others (such as I/O devices) may have much 
more general request and release code. For instance, in determining how best to use  the 
CPU, operating systems have CPU -scheduling routines that take into  account the speed of 
the CPU, the jobs that must be executed, the number of  registers available, and other 
factors. 
• Accounting. We want to keep track of which users use how much and  what kinds of 
computer resources. This record keeping may be used for accounting (so that users can be 
billed) or simply for accumulating usage  statistics. Usage statistics may be a valuable tool 
for researchers who wish to reconfigure the system to improve computing services. 
• Protection and security . The owners of information stored in a m ultiuser or networked 
computer system may want to control use of that information.  When several separate 
processes execute concurrently, it should not be  possible for one process to interfere with 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 20 
 
the others or with the operating  system itself. Protection involves ensuring that all access 
to system resources is controlled. 
 
User and Operating-System Interface 
One provides a command -line interface, or command interpreter , that allows users  to 
directly enter commands to be performed by the operating system. The other allows users to 
interface with the operating system via a graphical user  interface, or GUI. interpreters are 
known as shells. For example, on UNIX and Linux systems, a  user may choose among several 
different shells, including the Bourne s hell, C shell, Bourne-Again shell , Korn shell , and 
others. 
The main function of the command interpreter is to get and execute the next  user-
specified command. Many of the commands given at this level manipulate  files: create, delete, 
list, print, copy, execute, and so on. The MS-DOS and UNIX shells operate in this way. 
 
System Calls 
System calls provide an interface to the services made available by an operating  system. 
These calls are generally available as routines written in C and C++, although certain low-level 
tasks (for example, tasks where hardware  must be accessed directly) may have to be written 
using assembly -language instructions. An example to illustrate how system calls are used: 
writing a simple program to read data from one file and copy them to another file. 
 
Frequently, systems execute thousands of system calls  per second. Most programmers 
never see this level of detail, however.  Typically, application developers design programs 
according to an application programming interface (API). The API specifies a set of 
functions that are available to an application programmer, including the parameters that are 
passed to each function and t he return values the programmer can expect.  Three of the most 
common APIs available to application programmers are  the Windows API for  Windows 
systems, the POSIX API for POSIX-based systems (which include virtually all versions of UNIX, 
Linux, and Mac OSX), and the Java  API for programs that run on the Java virtual machine. A 
programmer accesses  an API via a library of code provided by the operating system. In the 
case of UNIX and Linux for programs written in the C language, the library is called libc. 
 
Behind the scenes, the functions that make up an API typically invoke the  actual 
system calls on behalf of the application programmer. For example, the  Windows function 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 21 
 
CreateProcess() (which unsurprisingly is used to create  a new process) actually invokes the 
NTCreateProcess() system call in the Windows kernel. 
 
 
 
 
For most programming languages, the run -time support system (a set of  functions built into 
libraries included with a compiler) provides a system call interface that serves as the link to 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 22 
 
system calls made available by the  operating system. The system -call interface intercepts 
function calls in the API and invokes the necessary system calls within the operating system. 
 
 
Types of System Calls 
• Process control 
• File management 
• Device management 
• Information maintenance 
• Communications 
• Protection 
Process Control 
A running program needs to be able to halt its execution either normally  (end()) or 
abnormally ( abort()). If a system call is made to terminate the  currently running program 
abnormally, or if the program runs into a problem  and causes an error trap, a dump of 
memory is sometimes taken and an error message generated. The dump is written to disk and 
may be examined by  a debugger—a system p rogram designed to aid the programmer in 
finding and correcting errors, or bugs—to determine the cause of the problem. Under  either 
normal or abnormal circumstances, the operating system must transfer  control to the 
invoking command interpreter. The command interpreter then reads the next command.  

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 23 
 
 
 
 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 24 
 
 
 
 
 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 25 
 
FreeBSD (derived from Berkeley UNIX) is an example of a multitasking  system. When a user 
logs on to the system, the shell of the user’s choice  is run. This shell is similar to the MS -DOS 
shell in that it accepts commands  and executes programs that the user requests. However, 
since FreeBSD is a  multitasking system, the command interpreter may continue running 
while another program is executed (Figure 2.10).  
 
To start a new process, the shell  executes a fork() system call. Then, the selected program is 
loaded into memory via an exec() system call, and the program is executed. Depending  on the 
way the command was issued, the shell then either  waits for the process  to finish or runs the 
process “in the background.” 
 
File Management 
We first need to be able to create() and delete() files. Either system call  requires the name of 
the file and perhaps some of the file’s attributes. Once  the file is created, we need to open() it 
and to use it. We may also read(), write(), or reposition() (rewind or skip to the end of the file, 
for example). Finally, we need to close() the file, indicating that we are no longer using it. 
 
Device Management 
Process may need several resources to execute —main memory, disk drives,  access to files, 
and so on. If the resources are available, they can be granted,  and control can be returned to 
the user process. Otherwise, the process will  have to wait until sufficient res ources are 
available. The various resources controlled by the operating system can be thought  of as 
devices. Some of these devices are physical devices (for example, disk  drives), while others 

UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 26 
 
can be thought of as abstract or virtual devices (for  example, files).A system with multiple 
users may require us to first request()  a device, to ensure exclusive use of it. After we are 
finished with the device, we release() it. Once the device has been requested (and allocated to 
us), we can read(), write(), and (possibly) reposition() the device, just as we can with files. 
 
Information Maintenance 
Many system calls exist simply for the purpose of transferring information  between the user 
program and the operating system. For example, most  systems have a system call to return 
the current time() and date(). Other  system calls may return information about the system, 
such as the number of current users, the version number of the operating system, the amount 
of free memory or disk space, and so on.  Another set of system calls is helpful in debugging a 
program. Many systems provide system calls to dump() memory. This provision is useful for  
debugging. 
 
Communication 
There are two common models of inter  process communication: the message  passing model 
and the shared-memory model. In the message -passing model, the communicating processes 
exchange messages with one another to transfer  information. Messages can be exchanged 
between the processes either directly  or indirectly through a common mailbox. Before 
communication can take place, a connection must be opened. 
 
 Each computer in  a network has a host name by which it is commonly 
known. A host also has a network identifier, such as an IP address. Similarly, each process has 
a process name, and this name is trans lated into an identifier by which the operating  system 
can refer to the process. The get hostid() and get processid()  system calls do this translation. 
The identifiers are then passed to the generalpurpose open() and close() calls provided by the 
file system or to specific open connection() and close connection() system calls, depending on 
the system’s model of communication. The recipient process usually must give its  permission 
for communication to take place with an accept connection() call. 
 
In the shar ed-memory model, processes use shared memory create()  and shared memory 
attach() system calls to create and gain access to regions  of memory owned by other 
processes. 
 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 27 
 
Protection 
Protection provides a mechanism for controlling access to the resources provided by a 
computer system.  Typically, system calls providing protection include set permission()  and 
get permission(), which manipulate the permission settings of  resources such as files and 
disks. The allow user() and deny user() system  calls specify whether particular users can —or 
cannot—be allowed access to certain resources. 
 
System Programs 
System programs, also known as system utilities,  provide a convenient environment for 
program development and execution. Some of them are simply user interfaces to system calls. 
Others are considerably more complex. They can be divided into these categories: 
• File management: These programs create, delete, copy, rename, print,  dump, list, and 
generally manipulate files and directories. 
• Status information: Some programs simply ask the system for the date,  time, amount 
of available memory or disk space, number of users, or  similar status information. 
Others are more complex, providing detailed  performance, logging, and debugging 
information. 
• File modification: Several text editors may be available to create and  modify the 
content of files stored on disk or other storage devices. There  may also be special 
commands to search contents of files or perform transformations of the text. 
• Programming-language support : Compilers, assemblers, debuggers, and  
interpreters for common programming languages (such as C, C++, Java,  and PERL) are 
often provided with the operating system or available as a separate download. 
• Program loading and execution : Once a program is assembled or compiled,  it must 
be loaded into memory to be executed. The system may  provide absolute loaders, 
relocatable loaders, linkage editors, and overlay  loaders. Debugging systems for either 
higher-level languages or machine language are needed as well. 
• Background services : All general -purpose systems have methods for  launching 
certain system -program processes at boot time. Some of these  processes terminate 
after completing their tasks, while others continue  to run until the system  is halted. 
Constantly running system -program processes are known as services, subsystems, or 
daemons. 
 
UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems Fundamentals  Page 28 
 
Along with system programs, most operating systems are supplied with  programs that are 
useful in solving common problems or performing common  operations. Such application 
programs include Web browsers, word processors  and text formatters, spreadsheets, 
database systems, compilers, plotting and statistical-analysis packages, and games. 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 1 
 
UNIT – II  
PROCESS MANAGEMENT : Process concepts - Operations on processes, IPC, Process 
Scheduling (T1: Ch-3). 
PROCESS COORDINATION: Process synchronization - critical section problem, Peterson’s 
solution, synchronization hardware, semaphores, classic problems of synchronization, 
readers and writers problem, dining philosopher’s problem, monitors (T1: Ch-5). 
Introduction 
Process: 
A process, which is a program  in execution. A process is the unit of work in a  modern 
time-sharing system. A system therefore consists of a collection of processes: operating  
system processes executing system code and user processes executing user  code. Potentially, 
all these processes can execute concurrently, with the CPU (or  CPUs) multiplexed among 
them. By switching the CPU between processes, the  operating system can make the computer 
more productive.  
A process is also known as job or task. A process is more than the program code, which 
is sometimes known as the text section. It also includes the current activity, as represented 
by the value of the program counter and the contents of the processor’s registers. A process 
generally also includes the proc ess stack, which contains temporary data (such as function  
parameters, return addresses, and local variables), and a data section, which contains global 
variables. A process may also include a heap, which is memory  that is dynamically allocated 
during process run time. The structure of a process in memory is shown in Figure 3.1. 
 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 2 
 
 
We emphasize that a program by itself is not a process. A program is a  passive entity, such as 
a file containing a list of instructions stored on disk  (often called an executable file ). In 
contrast, a process is an active entity, with a program counter specifying the next instruction 
to execute and a set  of associated resources. A program becomes a process when an 
executable file is loaded into memory. 
 
Process State 
As a process executes, it changes state. The state of a process is defined in part  by the current 
activity of that process. A process may be in one of the following states: 
• New. The process is being created. 
• Running. Instructions are being executed. 
• Waiting. The process is waiting for some event to occur (such as an I/O 
completion or reception of a signal). 
• Ready. The process is waiting to be assigned to a processor. 
• Terminated. The process has finished execution. 
It is important to realize that only one process can be running on any processor at any instant. 
Many processes may be ready and waiting, however. The state diagram corresponding  to 
these states is presented in Figure 3.2. 
 
2.3 Process Control Block 
Each process is represented in the operating system by a process control block (PCB)—also 
called a task control block . A PCB is shown in Figure 3.3. It contains  many pieces of 
information associated with a specific process, including these: 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 3 
 
 
Process state. The state may be new, ready, running, and waiting, halted, and so on. 
• Program counter. The counter indicates the address of the next instruction  to be executed 
for this process. 
• CPU registers . The registers vary in number and type, depending on  the computer 
architecture. They include accumulators, index registers,  stack pointers, and general-purpose 
registers, plus any condition -code information. Along with the program counter, this state 
information must  be saved when an interrupt o ccurs, to allow the process to be continued  
correctly afterward (Figure 3.4). 
• CPU-scheduling information . This information includes a process priority,  pointers to 
scheduling queues, and any other scheduling parameters. 
• Memory-management information. This information may include such  items as the value 
of the base and limit registers and the page tables, or the  segment tables, depending on the 
memory system used by the operating system. 
•Accounting information. This information includes the amount of CP U and real time used, 
time limits, account numbers, job or process numbers, and so on. 
• I/O status information . This information includes the list of I/O devices  allocated to the 
process, a list of open files, and so on. 
In brief, the PCB simply serves as the repository for any information that may  vary from 
process to process. 
 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 4 
 
 
Threads 
The process model discussed so far has implied that a process is a program that  performs a 
single thread of execution. For example, when a process is running a word -processor 
program, a single thread of instructions is being executed.  This single thread of control allows 
the process to perform only one task at  a time. The user cannot simultaneously type in 
characters and run the spell  checker within the  same process, for example. Most modern 
operating systems  have extended the process concept to allow a process to have multiple 
threads of execution and thus to perform more than one task at a time. This feature  is 
especially beneficial on multicore systems, where multiple threads can run in parallel. 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 5 
 
 
2.4 Operations on Processes 
The processes in most systems can execute concurrently, and they may  be created and 
deleted dynamically. 
Process Creation 
During the course of execution, a process may create several new processes. As  mentioned 
earlier, the creating process is called a parent process, and the new  processes are called the 
children of that process. Each of these new processes  may in turn create other processes, 
forming a tree of processes. Most operating systems (including UNIX, Linux, and Windows) 
identify processes according to a unique process identifier (or pid), which is typically  an 
integer number. The pid provides a unique value for each process in the  system, and it can be 
used as an index to access various attributes of a process within the kernel. 
When a process creates a new process, two possibilities for execution exist: 
1. The parent continues to execute concurrently with its children. 
2. The parent waits until some or all of its children have terminated. 
Process Termination 
A process terminates when it finishes executing its final statement and asks the  operating 
system to delete it by using the exit() system call. At that point, the  process may return a 
status value (typically an integer) to its parent process  (via the wait() system call). All the 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 6 
 
resources of the process —including physical and virtual memory, open files, and I/O 
buffers—are deallocated by the operating system. 
 
A parent may terminate the execution of one of its children for a variety of  reasons, 
such as these: 
• The child has exceeded its usage of some of the resources that it has been  allocated. (To 
determine whether this has occurred, the parent must have  a mechanism to inspect the state 
of its children.) 
• The task assigned to the child is no longer required. 
• The parent is exiting, and the operating system does not allow a child to  continue if its 
parent terminates. 
Some systems do not allow a child to exist if its parent has terminated. In  such systems, if a 
process terminates (either normally or abnormally), then  all its children must also be 
terminated. This phenomenon, referred to as cascading termination, is normally initiated by 
the operating system.  A process that has terminated, but whose parent ha s not yet called 
wait(), is  known as a zombie process. All processes transition to this state when they  
terminate, but generally they exist as zombies only briefly. 
 
2.2 Inter process Communication 
Processes executing concurrently in the operating system may be either  independent 
processes or cooperating processes. A process is independent if it cannot affect or be affected 
by the other processes executing in the system. Any process that does not share data with any 
other process is independent. A process is cooperating if it can affect or be affected by the 
other processes  executing in the system. Clearly, any process that shares data with other  
processes is a cooperating process. 
There are several reasons for providing an environment that allows process cooperation: 
• Information sharing . Since several users may be interested in the same  piece of 
information (for instance, a shared file), we must provide an environment to allow concurrent 
access to such information. 
• Computation spe edup. If we want a particular task to run faster, we must  break it into 
subtasks, each of which will be executing in parallel with the  others. Notice that such a 
speedup can be achieved only if the computer has multiple processing cores. 
• Modularity. We may want to construct the system in a modular fashion, dividing the system 
functions into separate processes or threads. 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 7 
 
• Convenience. Even an individual user may work on many tasks at the  same time. For 
instance, a user may be editing, listening to music, and compiling in parallel. 
 
Cooperating processes require an inter process communication (IPC) mechanism 
that will allow them to exchange data and information. There are two  fundamental models of 
inter process communication: shared memory and message passing. In the shared-memory 
model, a region of memory that is shared  by cooperating processes is established. Processes 
can then exchange information  by reading and writing data to the shared region. In the 
message-passing model, communication takes place by means of messages exchanged 
between the cooperating processes. 
 
The two communications models are contrasted in Figure 3.12. 
 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 8 
 
 
To illustrate the concept of cooperating processes, let’s consider the  producer–consumer 
problem, which is a common paradigm for cooperating  processes. A producer process 
produces information that is consumed by a  consumer process. For example, a compiler may 
produce assembly code that  is consumed by an assembler. The assembler, in turn, may 
produce object modules that are consumed by the loader.  
 
One solution to the producer –consumer problem uses shared memory. To  allow 
producer and consumer processes to run concurrently, we must have  available a buffer of 
items that can be filled by the producer and emptied by the consumer. This buffer will reside 
in a region of memory that is shared by  the producer and consumer processes. A producer 
can produce one item while  the consumer is consuming another item. The producer and 
consumer must be synchronized, so that the consumer does not try to consume an item that 
has not yet been produced. 
Two types of buffers can be used. The unbounded buffer places no practical limit on 
the size of the buffer. The consumer may have to wait for new items,  but the producer can 
always produce new items. The bounded buffer assumes a fixed buffer size. In this case, the 
consumer must wait if the buffer is empty, and the producer must wait if the buffer is full. 
 
Message passing provides a mechanism to allow pro cesses to communicate  and to 
synchronize their actions without sharing the same address space. It is particularly useful in a 
distributed environment, where the communicating  processes may reside on different 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 9 
 
computers connected by a network. For example, an Internet chat program could be designed 
so that chat participants communicate with one another by exchanging messages.  A message-
passing facility provides at least two operations: 
send(message) receive(message) 
Messages sent by a process can be either f ixed or variable in size.  Message passing may be 
either blocking or nonblocking— also known as synchronous and asynchronous. 
• Blocking send . The sending process is blocked until the message is  received by the 
receiving process or by the mailbox. 
• Nonblocking send. The sending process sends the message and resumes operation. 
• Blocking receive. The receiver blocks until a message is available. 
• Nonblocking receive. The receiver retrieves either a valid message or a null. 
 
 2.3 Process Scheduling 
The objective of multiprogramming is to have some process running at all  times, to maximize 
CPU utilization. The objective of time sharing is to switch the  CPU among processes so 
frequently that users can interact with each program while it is r unning. To meet these 
objectives, the process scheduler selects an available process (possibly from a set of several 
available processes) for  program execution on the CPU. For a single -processor system, there 
will never be more than one running process. If  there are more processes, the rest will have 
to wait until the CPU is free and can be rescheduled. 
 
Scheduling Queues 
As processes enter the system, they are put into a job queue, which consists of all processes 
in the system. The processes that are resid ing in main memory  and are ready and waiting to 
execute are kept on a list called the ready queue. This queue is generally stored as a linked 
list. A ready -queue header contains  pointers to the first and final PCBs in the list. Each PCB 
includes a pointer field that points to the next PCB in the ready queue. The list of processes 
waiting for a particular I/O device is called a device queue. 
 
A common representation of process scheduling is a queueing diagram, such as that 
in Figure 3.6. Each rectangular box represents a queue. Two types  of queues are present: the 
ready queue and a set of device queues. The circles  represent the resources that serve the 
queues, and the arrows indicate the flow of processes in the system. 
 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 10 
 
A new process is initially put in the ready queue. It waits there until it is  selected for 
execution, or dispatched. Once the process is allocated the CPU  and is executing, one of 
several events could occur: 
• The process could issue an I/O request and then be placed in an I/O queue. 
• The process could create a new child process and wait for the child’s termination. 
• The process could be removed forcibly from the CPU, as a result of an  interrupt, and be put 
back in the ready queue. 
 
Schedulers 
A process migrates among the various scheduling queues throughout its  lifetime. The 
operating system must select, for scheduling purposes, processes  from these queues in some 
fashion. The selection process is carried out by the appropriate scheduler. 
 
Often, in a batch syste m, more processes are submitted than can be executed  
immediately. These processes are spooled to a mass -storage device (typically a  disk), where 
they are kept for later execution. The long-term scheduler , or job scheduler, selects 
processes from this pool and loads them into memory for execution. The short-term 
scheduler, or CPU scheduler , selects from among  the processes that are ready to execute 
and allocates the CPU to one of them.  The long-term scheduler executes much less frequently; 
minutes may separate the creation of one new process and the next. The long -term scheduler 
controls the degree of multiprogramming (the number of processes in memory). 
 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 11 
 
It is important that the long -term scheduler make a careful selection. In  general, most 
processes can be described as either I/O bound or CPU bound.  An I/O-bound process is one 
that spends more of its time doing I/O than  it spends doing computations. A CPU-bound 
process, in contrast, generates  I/O requests infrequently, using more of its time doing 
computations. It is  important that the long -term scheduler select a good process mix of I/O-
bound and CPU -bound processes. The  system with the best performance will thus have a 
combination of CPU-bound and I/O-bound processes. 
 
Context Switch 
Interrupts cause the operating system to change  a CPU from its current task and to run a 
kernel routine. Such operations happen  frequently on general -purpose systems. When an 
interrupt occurs, the system  needs to save the current context of the process running on the 
CPU so that it can restore that context when its processing is done, essentially suspending the 
process and then resuming it. 
Switching the CPU to another process requires performing a state save of  the current 
process and a state restore of a different process . This task is known  as a context switch . 
When a context switch occurs, the kernel saves the context  of the old process in its PCB and 
loads the saved context of the new process  scheduled to run. Context-switch times are highly 
dependent on hardware support.  
 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 12 
 
2.4 Process synchronization 
A situation where  several processes access and manipulate the same data concurrently and 
the outcome of the execution depends on the particular order in which the access  takes place, 
is called a race condition . To guard against the race condition  we need to ensure that only 
one process at a time can be manipulating the variable counter. To make such a guarantee, we 
require that the processes be synchronized in some way. 
 
2.4.1 The Critical-Section Problem 
We begin our consideration of process synchronization by discussing the so  called critical-
section problem. Consider a system consisting of n processes {P0, P1, ..., Pn−1}. Each process 
has a segment of code, called a critical section , in which the process may be changing 
common variables, updating a table,  writing a file, and so on. The important feature of the 
system is that, when  one process is executing in its critical section, no other process is 
allowed to  execute in its critical section. That is, no two processes are executing in their  
critical sections at the same time. The critical-section problem is to design a  protocol that 
the processes can use to cooperate. Each  process must request permission to enter its critical 
section. 
 
The section of code implementing this request is the entry section. The critical section 
may be followed by an exit section. The remaining code is the remainder section . The 
general structure of  a typical process Pi is shown in Figure 5.1. The entry section and exit 
section are enclosed in boxes to highlight these important segments of code. 
 
A solution to the critical-section problem must satisfy the following three requirements: 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 13 
 
1. Mutual exclusion. If process Pi is executing in its critical section, then no  other processes 
can be executing in their critical sections. 
2. Progress. If no process is executing in its critical section and some  processes wish to enter 
their critical sect ions, then only those processes  that are not executing in their remainder 
sections can participate in deciding which will enter its critical section next, and this selection 
cannot be postponed indefinitely. 
3. Bounded waiting . There exists a bound, or limit, on the number of times  that other 
processes are allowed to enter their critical sections after a  process has made a request to 
enter its critical section and before that request is granted. 
 
Two general approaches are used to handle critical sections in operating systems:  
1) Preemptive kernels and  
2) non-Preemptive kernels.  
A preemptive ( preemption is the act of temporarily interrupting a task being carried 
out by a  computer system) kernel allows a process to be preempted while it is running in 
kernel mode. A  nonpreemptive kernel does not allow a process running in k ernel mode to 
preempted; a kernel -mode process will run until it exits kernel mode, blocks,  or voluntarily 
yields control of the CPU. 
 
2.4.2 Peterson’s Solution 
A classic software -based solution to the critical -section problem known as Peterson’s 
solution. Because of the way modern computer  architectures perform basic machine -
language instructions, such as load and store, there are no guarantees that Peterson’s solution 
will work correctly on  such architectures. However,  we present the solution because it 
provides a good algorithmic description of solving the critical-section problem and illustrates  
some of the complexities involved in designing softwa re that addresses the  requirements of 
mutual exclusion, progress, and bounded waiting. 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 14 
 
 
 
Peterson’s Solution is a classical software based solution to the critical section problem.  In 
Peterson’s solution, we have two shared variables: 
 
    boolean flag[i] :Initialized to FALSE, initially no one is interested in entering the critical 
section 
    int turn : The process whose turn is to enter the critical section. 
 
// code for producer (j)  
// producer j is ready  
// to produce an item  
flag[j] = true;  
   
// but consumer (i) can consume an item  
turn = i;  
   
// if consumer is ready to consume an item  
// and if its consumer's turn  
while (flag[i] == true && turn == i)  
      {  
// then producer will wait }  
      // otherwise producer will produce  
    // an item and put it into buffer (critical Section)  

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 15 
 
   
    // Now, producer is out of critical section  
    flag[j] = false;  
    // end of code for producer   
    //--------------------------------------------------------  
    // code for consumer i  
    // consumer i is ready  
    // to consume an item  
    flag[i] = true;  
    // but producer (j) can produce an item  
    turn = j;  
   
    // if producer is ready to produce an item  
    // and if its producer's turn  
    while (flag[j] == true && turn == j)  
        {  
// then consumer will wait }   
        // otherwise consumer will consume  
        // an item from buffer (critical Section)  
        // Now, consumer is out of critical section  
        flag[i] = false;  
// end of code for consumer 
 
Explanation of Peterson’s algorithm – 
Peterson’s Algorithm is used to synchronize two processes. It uses two variables, a bool array 
flag of size 2 and an int variable turn to accomplish it. In the solution i represents the 
Consumer and j represents the Producer. Initially the flags are false.  When a process wants to 
execute it’s critical section, it sets it’s flag to true and turn as the index of the other process. 
This means that the process wants to execute but it will allow the other process to run first. 
The process performs busy waiting u ntil the other process has finished it’s own critical 
section. 
After this the current process enters it’s critical section and adds or removes a random 
number from the shared buffer. After completing the critical section, it sets it’s own flag to 
false, indication it does not wish to execute anymore. 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 16 
 
 
Synchronization Hardware 
However, as mentioned, software -based solutions such as Peterson’s  are not guaranteed to 
work on modern computer architectures. In the following  discussions, we explore several 
more solutions to the critical -section problem  using techniques ranging from hardware to 
software-based APIs available to  both kernel developers and application programmers. All 
these solutions are  based on the premise of locking —that is, protecting criti cal regions 
through the use of locks. 
 
Mutex Locks 
operating-systems designers build software tools to  solve the critical -section problem. The 
simplest of these tools is the mutex lock. (In fact, the term mutex is short for mutual 
exclusion.) We use the mutex lock to protect critical regions and thus prevent race conditions. 
That is, a  process must acquire the lock before entering a critical section; it releases the  lock 
when it exits the critical section. The acquire()function acquires the lock,  and the release() 
function releases the lock. 
 
A mutex lock has a boolean variable available whose value indicates if  the lock is 
available or not. If the lock is available, a call to acquire() succeeds, and the lock is then 
considered unavailable. A process that attempts to acquire  an unavailable lock is blocked 
until the lock is released. 
 
The definition of acquire() is as follows: 
acquire() { 
while (!available) 
; /* busy wait */ 
available = false;; 
} 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 17 
 
 
The definition of release() is as follows: 
release() { 
available = true; 
} 
The main disadvantage of the implementation given here is that it requires  busy waiting . 
While a process is in its critical section, any other process that  tries to enter its critical section 
must loop continuously in the call to acquire(). In fact, this type of mutex lock is also called a 
spinlock because the process “spins” while waiting for the lock to become available. 
 
Semaphores 
Mutex locks, as we menti oned earlier, are generally considered the simplest of  
synchronization tools. In this section, we examine a more robust tool that can behave 
similarly to a mutex lock but can also provide more sophisticated ways  for processes to 
synchronize their activities. 
A semaphore S is an integer variable that, apart from initialization, is  accessed only 
through two standard atomic operations: wait() and signal(). The wait() operation was 
originally termed P; signal() was originally called V . The definition of wait() is as follows: 
wait(S) { 
while (S <= 0) 
; // busy wait 
S--; 
} 
The definition of signal() is as follows: 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 18 
 
signal(S) { 
S++; 
} 
All modifications to the integer value of the semaphore in the wait() and signal() operations 
must be executed indivisibly. That is, when one process  modifies the semaphore value, no 
other process can simultaneously modify  that same semaphore value. In add ition, in the case 
of wait(S), the testing of the integer value of S (S ≤ 0), as well as its possible modification (S--), 
must be executed without interruption. 
 
Semaphore Usage 
Operating systems often distinguish between counting and binary semaphores. The value of a 
counting semaphore can range over an unrestricted domain.  The value of a binary 
semaphore can range only between 0 and 1. Thus, binary  semaphores behave similarly to 
mutex locks. In fact, on systems that do not  provide mutex lock s, binary semaphores can be 
used instead for providing mutual exclusion. 
 
Counting semaphores can be used to control access to a given resource  consisting of a 
finite number of instances. The semaphore is initialized to the  number of resources available. 
Each process that wishes to use a resource  performs a wait() operation on the semaphore 
(thereby decrementing the count). When a process releases a resource, it performs a signal() 
operation (incrementing the count). When the count for the semaphore goes to  0, all  
resources are being used. After that, processes that wish to use a resource will  block until the 
count becomes greater than 0. 
 
We can also use semaphores to solve various synchronization problems.  For example, 
consider two concurrently running pro cesses: P1 with a statement  S1 and P2 with a 
statement S2. Suppose we require that S2 be executed only  after S1 has completed. We can 
implement this scheme readily by letting P1 and P2 share a common semaphore synch, 
initialized to 0. In process P1, we insert the statements  
S1; 
signal(synch); 
In process P2, we insert the statements 
wait(synch); 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 19 
 
S2; 
Because synch is initialized to 0, P2 will execute S2 only after P1 has invoked  signal(synch), 
which is after statement S1 has been executed. 
 
Deadlocks and Starvation 
 The implementation of a semaphore with a waiting queue may result in a  situation 
where two or more processes are waiting indefinitely for an event  that can be caused only by 
one of the waiting processes. The event in question  is the execution of a signal() operation. 
When such a state is reached, these processes are said to be deadlocked. 
To illustrate this, consider a system consisting of two processes, P0 and P1, each accessing 
two semaphores, S and Q, set to the value 1: 
 
Suppose that P0 executes wait(S) and then P1 executes wait(Q).When P0 executes wait(Q), it 
must wait until P1 executes signal(Q). Similarly, when  P1 executes wait(S), it must wait until 
P0 executes signal(S). Since these signal() operations cannot be executed, P0 and P1 are 
deadlocked. We say that a set of processes is in a deadlocked state when every process  in the 
set is waiting for an event that can be caused only by another process in the set. 
 
Another problem related to deadlocks is indefinite blocking or starvation, a 
situation in which processes wait indefinitely within the semaphore. Indefinite  blocking may 
occur if we remove processes from the list associated with a  semaphore in LIFO (last-in, first-
out) order. 
 
Priority Inversion 
A scheduling challenge arises when a higher -priority process needs to read  or modify kernel 
data that are currently being accessed by a lower -priority process—or a chain of lower -
priority processes. Since ker nel data are typically  protected with a lock, the higher -priority 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 20 
 
process will have to wait for a  lower-priority one to finish with the resource. The situation 
becomes more  complicated if the lower -priority process is preempted in favor of another  
process with a higher priority. 
 
As an example, assume we have three processes—L, M, and H—whose priorities follow 
the order L < M < H. Assume that process H requires resource R, which is currently being 
accessed by process L. Ordinarily, process  H would wait for L to finish using resource R. 
However, now suppose that  process M becomes runnable, thereby preempting process L. 
Indirectly, a process with a lower priority—process M—has affected how long process H must 
wait for L to relinquish resource R. This problem is known as priority inversion. It occurs 
only in systems with more than two priorities, so one solution is to have only two priorities. 
 
Classic Problems of Synchronization 
Bounded Buffer Problem 
Bounded buffer problem, which is also called  producer consumer problem , is one of the 
classic problems of synchronization. Let's start by understanding the problem here, before 
moving on to the solution and program code. 
What is the Problem Statement? 
There is a buffer of  n slots and each slot is capable of storing one unit of data. There are two 
processes running, namely, producer and consumer, which are operating on the buffer. 
 
Bounded Buffer Problem 
A producer tries to insert data into an empty slot of the buffer. A consumer tries to remove 
data from a filled slot in the buffer. As you might have guessed by now, those two processes 
won't produce the expected output if they are being executed concurrently. 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 21 
 
There needs to be a way to make the producer and consumer work in an independent 
manner. 
Here's a Solution 
One solution of this problem is to use semaphores. The semaphores which will be used here 
are: 
• m, a binary semaphore which is used to acquire and release the lock. 
• empty, a  counting semaphore  whose initial value is the number of slots in the buffer, 
since, initially all slots are empty. 
• full, a counting semaphore whose initial value is 0. 
At any instant, the current value of empty repres ents the number of empty slots in the buffer 
and full represents the number of occupied slots in the buffer. 
The Producer Operation 
The pseudocode of the producer function looks like this: 
do  
{ 
    // wait until empty > 0 and then decrement 'empty' 
    wait(empty);    
    // acquire lock 
    wait(mutex);   
        /* perform the insert operation in a slot */ 
        // release lock 
    signal(mutex);   
    // increment 'full' 
    signal(full);    
}  
while(TRUE); 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 22 
 
• it decrements the empty semaphore because, there will now be one less empty slot, since 
the producer is going to insert data in one of those slots. 
• Then, it acquires lock on the buffer, so that the consumer cannot access the buffer until 
producer completes its operation. 
• After performing the insert operation, the lock is released and the value of  full is 
incremented because the producer has just filled a slot in the buffer. 
The Consumer Operation 
The pseudocode for the consumer function looks like this: 
do  
{ 
    // wait until full > 0 and then decrement 'full' 
    wait(full); 
    // acquire the lock 
    wait(mutex);   
        /* perform the remove operation in a slot */  
        // release the lock 
    signal(mutex);  
    // increment 'empty' 
    signal(empty);  
}  
while(TRUE); 
• The consumer waits until there is at least one full slot in the buffer. 
• Then it decrements the  full semaphore because the number of occupied slots will be 
decreased by one, after the consumer completes its operation. 
• After that, the consumer acquires lock on the buffer. 
• Following that, the consumer completes the removal operation so that the data from one 
of the full slots is removed. 
• Then, the consumer releases the lock. 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 23 
 
• Finally, the  empty semaphore is incremented by 1, because the consumer has just 
removed data from an occupied slot, thus making it empty. 
What is Readers Writer Problem? 
Readers writer problem is another example of a classic synchronization problem. There are 
many variants of this problem, one of which is examined below. 
The Problem Statement 
There is a shared resource which should be accessed by multiple processes. There are two 
types of processes in this context. They are  reader and writer. Any number of  readers can 
read from the shared resource simultaneously, but only one  writer can write to the shared 
resource. When a  writeris writing data to the resource, no other process can access the 
resource. A  writer cannot write to the resource if there are non-zero number o f readers 
accessing the resource at that time. 
The Solution 
From the above problem statement, it is evident that readers have higher priority than writer. 
If a writer wants to write to the resource, it must wait until there are no readers currently 
accessing that resource. 
Here, we use one  mutex m and a  semaphore w. An integer variable  read_count is used to 
maintain the number of readers currently accessing the resource. The variable  read_count is 
initialized to 0. A value of 1 is given initially to m and w. 
Instead of having the process to acquire lock on the shared resource, we use the mutex  m to 
make the process to acquire and release lock whenever it is updating the read_count variable. 
The code for the writer process looks like this: 
while(TRUE)  
{ 
    wait(w); 
   /* perform the write operation */ 
   signal(w); 
} 
And, the code for the reader process looks like this: 
while(TRUE)  
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 24 
 
{ 
    //acquire lock 
    wait(m); 
    read_count++; 
    if(read_count == 1) 
        wait(w); 
        //release lock   
    signal(m);   
        /* perform the reading operation */ 
        // acquire lock 
    wait(m);    
    read_count--; 
    if(read_count == 0) 
        signal(w); 
         
    // release lock 
    signal(m);   
} 
Here is the Code uncoded(explained) 
• As seen above in the code for the writer, the writer just waits on the  w semaphore until it 
gets a chance to write to the resource. 
• After performing the write operation, it increments  w so that the next writer can access 
the resource. 
• On the other hand, in the code for the reader, the lock is acquired whenever 
the read_count is updated by a process. 
• When a reader wants to access the resource, first it increments the  read_count value, 
then accesses the resource and then decrements the read_count value. 
• The semaphore w is used by the first reader which enters the critical section and the last 
reader which exits the critical section. 
• The reason for this is, when the first readers enters the critical section, the writer is 
blocked from the resource. Only new readers can access the resource now. 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 25 
 
• Similarly, when the last reader exits the critical section, it signals the writer using 
the w semaphore because there are zero readers now and a writer can have the chance to 
access the resource. 
Dining Philosophers Problem 
The dining philosophers problem is another classic synchronization problem which is used to 
evaluate situations where there is a need of allocating multiple resources to multiple 
processes. 
What is the Problem Statement? 
Consider there are five philosophers sitting around a circular dining table. The dining table 
has five chopsticks and a bowl of rice in the middle as shown in the below figure. 
 
Dining Philosophers Problem 
At any instant, a philosopher is either eating or thinking. When a philosopher wants to eat, he 
uses two chopsticks - one from their left and one from their right. When a philosopher wants 
to think, he keeps down both chopsticks at their original place. 
 
Here's the Solution 
From the problem sta tement, it is clear that a philosopher can think for an indefinite amount 
of time. But when a philosopher starts eating, he has to stop at some point of time. The 
philosopher is in an endless cycle of thinking and eating. 
An array of five semaphores, stick[5], for each of the five chopsticks. 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 26 
 
The code for each philosopher looks like: 
while(TRUE)  
{ 
    wait(stick[i]); 
    /*  
        mod is used because if i=5, next  
        chopstick is 1 (dining table is circular) 
    */ 
    wait(stick[(i+1) % 5]);   
                      /* eat */ 
    signal(stick[i]); 
       signal(stick[(i+1) % 5]);  
    /* think */ 
} 
When a philosopher wants to eat the rice, he will wait for the chopstick at his left and picks up 
that chopstick. Then he waits for the right chopstick to be available, and then picks it too. 
After eating, he puts both the chopsticks down. 
But if all five philosophers are hungry simultaneously, and each of them pickup one chopstick, 
then a deadlock situation occurs because they will be waiting f or another chopstick forever. 
The possible solutions for this are: 
• A philosopher must be allowed to pick up the chopsticks only if both the left and right 
chopsticks are available. 
• Allow only four philosophers to sit at the table. That way, if all the four  philosophers pick 
up four chopsticks, there will be one chopstick left on the table. So, one philosopher can 
start eating and eventually, two chopsticks will be available. In this way, deadlocks can be 
avoided. 
Process Synchronization | Monitors 
Monitor i s one of the ways to achieve Process synchronization. Monitor is supported by 
programming languages to achieve mutual exclusion between processes. For example Java 
Synchronized methods. Java provides wait() and notify() constructs. 
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 27 
 
1. It is the collection of condition variables and procedures combined together in a 
special kind of module or a package. 
2. The processes running outside the monitor can’t access the internal variable of 
monitor but can call procedures of the monitor. 
3. Only one process at a time can execute code inside monitors. 
Syntax of Monitor 
 
Condition Variables 
Two different operations are performed on the condition variables of the monitor. 
1. Wait. 
2. signal. 
let say we have 2 condition variables 
condition x, y; //Declaring variable 
Wait operation 
x.wait() : Process performing wait operation on any condition variable are suspended. The 
suspended processes are placed in block queue of that condition variable. 
Note: Each condition variable has its unique block queue. 
Signal operation 
x.signal(): When a process performs signal operation on condition variable, one of the 
blocked processes is given chance. 
If (x block queue empty) 
  // Ignore signal 
else 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 28 
 
  // Resume a process from block queue. 
Dining-Philosophers Solution Using Monitors 
Dining-Philosophers Problem – N philosophers seated around a circular table 
 
• There is one chopstick between each philosopher 
• A philosopher must pick up its two nearest chopsticks in order to eat 
• A philosopher must pick up first one chopstick, then the second one, not both at once 
We need an algorithm for allocating these limited resources(chopsticks) among several 
processes(philosophers) such that solution is free from deadlock and free from starvation. 
There exist some algorithm to solve Dining – Philosopher Problem, but they may have 
deadlock situation. Also, a deadlock -free solution is not necessarily starvation -free. 
Semaphores can result in deadlock due to programming errors. Monitors alone are not 
sufficiency to solve this, we need monitors with condition variables 
 
 
Monitor-based Solution to Dining Philosophers 
We illustrate monitor concepts by presenting a deadlock -free solution to the dining-
philosophers problem. Monitor is used to control access to state variables and condition 
variables. It only tells when to enter and exit the segment. This solution imposes the 
restriction that a philosopher may pick up her chopsticks only if both of them are available. 
To code this solution, we need to distinguish among three states in which we may find a 
philosopher. For this purpose, we introduce the following data structure: 

UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 29 
 
THINKING – When philosopher doesn’t want to gain access to either fork. 
HUNGRY – When philosopher wants to enter the critical section. 
EATING – When philosopher has got both the forks, i.e., he has entered the section. 
Philosopher i can set the variable state[i] = EATING only if her two neighbors are not eating  
(state[(i+4) % 5] != EATING) and (state[(i+1) % 5] != EATING). 
// Dining-Philosophers Solution Using Monitors  
monitor DP  
{  
 status state[5];  
 condition self[5];  
 // Pickup chopsticks  
 Pickup(int i)  
 {  
  // indicate that I’m hungry  
  state[i] = hungry;  
  // set state to eating in test()  
  // only if my left and right neighbors  
  // are not eating  
  test(i);  
  // if unable to eat, wait to be signaled  
  if (state[i] != eating)  
   self[i].wait;  
 }  
 
 // Put down chopsticks  
 Putdown(int i)  
 {  
  // indicate that I’m thinking  
  state[i] = thinking;  
  // if right neighbor R=(i+1)%5 is hungry and  
  // both of R’s neighbors are not eating,  
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 30 
 
  // set R’s state to eating and wake it up by  
  // signaling R’s CV  
  test((i + 1) % 5);  
  test((i + 4) % 5);  
 }  
 test(int i)  
 {  
  if (state[(i + 1) % 5] != eating  
   && state[(i + 4) % 5] != eating  
   && state[i] == hungry) {  
   // indicate that I’m eating  
   state[i] = eating;  
   // signal() has no effect during Pickup(),  
   // but is important to wake up waiting  
   // hungry philosophers during Putdown()  
   self[i].signal();  
  }  
 }  
 init()  
 {  
  // Execution of Pickup(), Putdown() and test()  
  // are all mutually exclusive,  
  // i.e. only one at a time can be executing  
for 
 i = 0 to 4  
  // Verify that this monitor-based solution is  
  // deadlock free and mutually exclusive in that  
  // no 2 neighbors can eat simultaneously  
  state[i] = thinking;  
 }  
UNIT-2 NOTES 
 
Operating Systems  Page 31 
 
} // end of monitor 
Above Program is a monitor solution to the dining-philosopher problem. 
We also need to declare 
condition self[5]; 
This allows philosopher i to delay herself when she is hungry but is unable to obtain the 
chopsticks she needs. We are now in a position to describe our solution to the dining -
philosophers problem. The distribution of the chopsticks is controlled by the monitor Dining 
Philosophers. Each philosopher, before starting to eat, must invoke the operation pickup(). 
This act may result in the suspension of the philosopher process. After the successful 
completion of the operation, the philosopher may eat. Following this, the philosopher invokes 
the putdown() operation. Thus, philosopher i must invoke the operations pickup() and 
putdown() in the following sequence: 
DiningPhilosophers.pickup(i); 
              ... 
              eat 
              ... 
DiningPhilosophers.putdown(i); 
It is easy to show that this solution ensures that  no two neighbors are eating simultaneously 
and that no deadlocks will occur. We note, however, that it is possible for a philosopher to 
starve to death. 
 
 
